
### redux

Port talk Pago Pago

International dateline made in 1884 in Washington

Woman with variations of walkers. Determination to walk and get out of wheel chair.

Basically 180 longitude. Local variations.

US dollars accepted.

18,000 gdp

National Park is high point! Least visited! Visitor center is walkable.

US National but not Citizen

Beach within walking

Insect repellent important.

Dinner with #names Yvonne and Allan

Folio to store cards

[https://myemail.constantcontact.com/Holy-Week---Easter-Services-Around-the-Diocese.html?soid=1101479076646&aid=CogjVXpqSFM](https://myemail.constantcontact.com/Holy-Week---Easter-Services-Around-the-Diocese.html?soid=1101479076646&aid=CogjVXpqSFM)

Ely cathedral. Large painting of God drawing crooked line ending in cross

She raised Plymouth brethren in northeast Scotland. Reached to legalism and not welcoming

He spent career as public defender, defender of outcast, immigrants etc. tired now.

Espresso martini

Oz espresso

Oz vidka

Oz Kailua

Chocolate chip


## Things to do

- [ ] Dinner with #names Yvonne & Allan

## Reflection


### I'm challenged by

- #wonder I wonder about how I have had a hard time understanding lyrics since -- like forever. Is it a matter of my hearing? Brain connections? It feels like the same thing I experience now where I know someone is speaking, but I can't process, decipher, decode the sounds into words.  
- About differences of Micronesia, Melanesia, Polynesia

### What I did well today

- 

### What I've learned today

- Islands are defined when they are on the same techtonic plates. Greenland on the North American plate. Australia it's own plate.
- International date line -- 180° -- duh
- 

## Things I'm grateful for

- 

---
- [[SC vs. Trump]] although mostly facilitating each other
- [[Indian philosophy teaches us]]
- [[Trump and market manipulation]]
- [[Impact of the tariffs]]
- [[Brooks on importance of reading]]
- [[The stakes before SC]]
- [[Abdicating American influence]]
- [[Destroying what makes America great]]
- [[Language made us]] 