
## ﻿﻿Fri, Apr 18﻿ 
tour of memories with #names Bud and Berta
- Welcome bags from Berta.
- Driving up by Blaisdel
- Where was TGIF. Mangos most eaten fruit.
- Medical school
- Emiru monument
- Turn onto Kinau
- Past apt of ? Family
- Shriner’s
- Kahala mall
- Cockroach park
- AYSO officer up the ridge gated community. Marianist couple up the top. Rick and Ann.
- Looking for Yoshioka house
- Foodland now a Pet stuff store
- Waiting in line at Hanauma Bay
- Line up a green Koko Crater
- Watching for whales
- Path up makapu’u
- Remember East of Eden beach and whale mother
- Women’s prison. Waimanalo homes. Some new some fallen down.
- Tsuruda’s garden
- The public health clinic
- The golf course ? ‘Olomana
- St Matthews
- Fog and the place where I ran into end of rainbow
- Find place to pee Kaneohe
- Chinamans hat.
- Full huge parking at: kuola ranch and crouching lion
- Beach we went to at the curve
- The Hawaiian homestead community with the pool after hike with rope swing
- Married there! St Joachim
- Pouring rain
- Another breach we went with girls
- We bought alcohol at that Tamuras
- Kahuku
- Traffic jam!
- Sunset beach and the jump rock beach. It looked different.
- New houses. “No Development”
- Matsumoto shaved ice. Sandwich place across street.
- Haleiwa park with birthing stone. Doesn’t look like still there. Bud Berta said it was up the hill. I think that is historically accurate.
- Wahiawa why did I go there? Organ? Walt ?
- Mililani. Why often stopped at shopping center. Times. Longs. Gas. Cash?
- Soccer field. “16 acre”
- Arrange July in Orlando. Why do they like us.

 #names Montaa was on Rotterdam with us. She knew Jeremiah. (From Volendam)

## Overview

- Info - cruise
- After Seattle
- Dock to Train
- Train to Olympia hotel
- Olympia reservation
- Train to Vancouver
- Vancouver reservation
- Train to Seattle hotel
- Fly Seattle to Tampa
## Things to do

- [ ] Spend the day with Bud / Bertha

## Reflection


### I'm challenged by

- From *Give us this day*
	- People of the Resurrection

What about you and me today? Do we still doubt that [Jesus’] kind of love makes much sense in our complex technological world? Does the way of suffering servanthood seem out of place in our world of huge and powerful institutions? That doubt was the experience of the disciples between Good Friday and Easter Sunday. They, too, felt overwhelmed by the powers and forces that ruled the day. But they were converted. The disciples became the people of the resurrection. They began to live lives filled with the fruits of conversion. They began living in the power of the resurrection. We, too, can know the power of Christ’s resurrection.

But such power will not come simply by attesting to the theological fact of the resurrection. We, like the first disciples, must come out of hiding and see the risen Lord. Seeing is believing, and believing is knowing that we must turn and follow Jesus. The wisdom of God in Jesus Christ will then be made known to the principalities and the powers through the church. The place in which the dominion of the powers is broken is the fellowship of the resurrection, the church community that nurtures growing confidence in the power of God’s love. The resurrection restores broken fellowship. Because the Lord is risen, love reigns where fear once controlled.

Jim Wallis, The Call to Conversion

Jim Wallis is the inaugural Archbishop Desmond Tutu Chair in Faith and Justice at the McCourt School of Public Policy and the faculty director of Georgetown University’s Center on Faith and Justice. He is a New York Times bestselling author, public theologian, renowned preacher, and commentator on ethics and public life.

### What I did well today

- 

### What I've learned today

- 

## Things I'm grateful for

-

---

- [[So You Want to Be a Dissident]]
- [[How a scandal could knock the wind out of the Florida first lady’s political sails]]
- [[Takeaways from AP’s report on the religious and moral undercurrents in Superman comics]]
- [[Why do Trump voters have no regrets Because the people they hate are getting hurt more]]

