
## April 12
- Dinner
- Robin and Ron handicap Seattle
  - Both on scooters
  - She in Honolulu in 50s
- Clues to going forward
- Counterculture
- Where is the outrage? You're comfortable?
- Trust broken. Betrayal. How come back from?

## Things to do

- [ ] table of SD calendar assignments [[SD-Calendar-3]]
- [ ] What to do with the church
## Reflection

- [[The Odyssey resurfaces in the present]]
- [[American brain drain]]
- [[Never more important to write]]
- [[value of Bookx Palma]] 
- [[Listening to The Great Gatsby]]
- together with e-ink reader. [[Light phone]]
- [[smartphones exemption]]
- [[Elon Musks destructive path]]
- [[The wrong lessons from Musk]]
- [[trick for hearing in a loud room]]
- [[FDRs global system]]
### I'm challenged by

- [[SD-Calendar-3]] #spiritual-direction

### What I did well today

- 

### What I've learned today

- [[Better browsers for android]]

## Things I'm grateful for

- from Cheryl in SD group: *Faith is not a collection of good deeds, but a quality of courage and love.*  
    -John Donahue
-
---
from Rohr

> Then in the Gospel, since we are about to enter Holy Week tomorrow, we are exposed to the much more common way that cultures try to create unity, what René Girard calls “the negative unanimity around one.” You can either rally around love to unite, or you can rally around fear, gossip, paranoia, and negativity, usually symbolized by one issue or person. I am afraid the second rallying point is the much more common. It is more efficient and gathers groups much more quickly and tightly than love does. I wish it were not true. In this case, (Lenten readings) 

Starter Prayer “Jesus, our Scapegoat, you forever show us on the cross both the human problem and the divine solution. Help me to be part of your solution and to stop creating and persecuting scapegoats. I now know that I might just be killing you.”