
## April 13
- (Palm Sunday)
- Dinner
  -  #names Lottie & Stephanie. From Wales.
  - #names Scott & Juanita. Chicago. Travel business. Clueless?About what I was talking about. When we're able to call for equality of income across the globe. Then we can call for equality of sacrifice for global warming.
- Hawai'i sensitivity training, history intro. 2pm
  - Nb that hula dancers don't jump. They remain connected to the aina. And that is pono.
  - I felt such a pang of homesickness. The hula spokesperson related her own literal homesickness when she left her grandmother to go her own way. Only when she came home to her "calling", did she get well.
  - The presentation had elements of what I spent 13 years learning. l'olelo. pono. kuliana. hula as a spiritual matter. David Kalakau as the "Merry Monarch" restoring ancient values.

## Things to do

- [ ] outline calendar SD training module 1-2 to go with 3. Aim to have a quick review.

## Reflection


### I'm challenged by

- 

### What I did well today

- connected with our front door cam (Wyze) using my local Obsidian vault
- yesterday found the app "**Venite**" for phone. amazing convenient and versatile prayer BCP resource.

### What I've learned today

- I was sitting by the pool at ca. 10am this morning. Finishing my breakfast. With 2 lattes on the table I was getting ready to bring them back to the cabin. Without warning the ship's horn blew for at least 10 sec. It was painfully loud where I was sitting. 
	- Later our steward, Ivan, told me that it was because at that moment we crossed the **equator**.
- [[SD-Calendar-1]] 
- [[SD-Calendar-2]] 
## Things I'm grateful for

---

## Reading

[[We've become a police state]]
[[Palm Sunday a Protest]]
[[Musk and loathe thy neighbor]]

[[Greatest trade diversion known]]
[[Textile industry and South Carolina]]
[[GOPs love affair with Russia]]
[[Frisco and homelessness]]
[[Holocaust story finally told]]