## April 7

Charlotte

I don't know how to say how much your hospitality meant to me yesterday. Vinaka. Mahalo. thank you from the bottom of my heart. Tell Luisa, thank you for her gift of the fan. I hope things go well with your husbands tests and doctor's appointment. A friend from church who had been a practicing Jew in his youth told me that good friends don’t say "shalom" but rather "l’hitraot", meaning "until we meet again". I prefer shalom because it has deep meanings of peace. But I also like the thought of "til we meet again" because it means we are good friends, you and I, and we shall meet again. Thank you.

Dinner sharing

Marie and Steen from #names Australia. Tim Tam dessert was disappointment. Both eager to engage us.

Montaa server in Billiard.


## Things to do

- [x] write to Charlotte
- [x] Laundry

## Reflection

### I'm challenged by

- my contentment to be reading and writing (teching along the way)

### What I did well today

- composing a little message to Charlotte
- Reaquainting myself with Charles Williams

### What I've learned today

- [[The formula used by trump]]
- [[Trump endangering the country]]
- [[Russia played Trump]]
- [[Fealty to oligarchy]]
- [[Sumerian art]]

## Things I'm grateful for

- The smiles from various humble servants onboard the ship
- Ivan -- a smile just seems to bubble up from inside him. He is going ashore in Honolulu. His helpfulness in getting MP ice when needed.
- MP's "Cathy" who cleans all the bathrooms from 10->A.

---

[[android e ink]] devices -- purchase when home?