## ﻿﻿Mon, Apr 21
- Our Pope has died
- #names Randall and Cathy. He was fund raising at CDSP. Staff of Grace Cathedral. Retire in coast of Oregon.

## Things to do

- [ ] 

## Reflection


### I'm challenged by

- [[Losing My Religion, Finding Resurrection]]

### What I did well today

- 
### What I've learned today

- We're going to have dinner with a couple we met through #names Yvonne and Allen. They told us about them, and Yvonne accompanied them on Easter Sunday to the early service at St. Andrew's: (the Hawaiian Eucharist)
	- I learned from them about the purchase of CDSP by Trinity Church, Wall Street. That led me to thinking about General (and their merger with Virginia Seminary.)
	- There I read about [[Michael Battle]] who was in my small group my 2nd CREDO in Louisiana.
	- I resonated so deeply with him at the time. Most of all I remember is brainstorming that a possible path for St. Mary's was to host resident theologians at the house in back. 

## Things I'm grateful for

- [[Francis final sermon]] a powerful final word. Flee, run, because he is not in the tomb. He is elsewhere.
### The Pope’s final sermon began with the words, “Mary Magdalene.”
### Pope Francis died today, on this Easter Monday.
<br><br>Throughout his papacy, and despite the vast differences between our lives, I always felt a profound spiritual kinship with him. And I’ve been deeply grateful that he was a moral leader with a unique and important call and message for global community in these days.<br><br>I will pray for him and for the Catholic Church in these hard and holy days. If you are a praying person, I hope you will, too. Who is the leader of the world’s Catholics is important — especially important in these days of authoritarian cruelty.<br><br>It is obvious Pope Francis understood that. He didn’t shy away from that responsibility in his final writings and remarks.

As the commemorations spread in the news and online, you will probably see many comments on his final remarks to the crowd in St. Peter’s Square, “[Urbi et Orbi” (“To the City and to the World”)](https://substack.com/redirect/95bc6deb-2cdd-426a-8938-ba71f85e246b?j=eyJ1IjoiMW91ejZvIn0.xCUUX-G1mqOe_p0uPEybRD6sQoY3OtX97OlEZbEJxWg). The address is a small masterwork in theology and politics — as so many of Pope Francis’ addresses have been:<br><br>> _The light of Easter impels us to break down the barriers that create division and are fraught with grave political and economic consequences. It impels us to care for one another, to increase our mutual solidarity, and to work for the integral development of each human person…_<br>> <br>> _I appeal to all those in positions of political responsibility in our world not to yield to the logic of fear which only leads to isolation from others, but rather to use the resources available to help the needy, to fight hunger and to encourage initiatives that promote development. These are the “weapons” of peace: weapons that build the future, instead of sowing seeds of death!_|

---

- [[rise and fall of great power competition]]