

[[2025-04-11 redux]]



## April 11

### - Pago pago
- It seems surprising to me how familiar and Home like it feels here in this country city village. The standard of living is so far behind anything I have known.
- It seems like it has something to do with having known people from American Summer. People I understood to be friends. I think I could live here very happily the last years of my life. But obviously as Allen reminded me last night Mary Pat couldn’t do that.
- Somehow, in the mystery of that there is a message for me and how to respond to current events once I get back to where I live. It’s not home, but where I live.
- What is that mystery? Perhaps it’s a call to simplicity. Mary Pat would be happy with that. I’m not sure how it fits except for perhaps tomorrow is going to the desert.
- In the store next to the national Park visitor center there was a lot of fabric that was Polynesian Pacific Islander kind. And sold examples of the Fiji sulu. 599 was a common price  I think Joan fabric carries something similar for about 35 99
- Perhaps I could make clothing to sell or giveaway advertising, or proceeds to go to…
- Mahatma Gandhi spinning thread in the last of his life. The other day I saw a picture of all of his possessions when he died. Two slippers, maybe a hat or two other things.

### - Mac and cheese with
- Seafood
- Veggies
- Chinos of ...

## Things to do

- [ ] Go ashore. Visit National Park.
- [ ] Chart map of Spiritual Direction to help me decide how to proceed with module 3.
- [ ] 

## Reflection

- [[American literature is imperialistic]] #reading  

### I'm challenged by

- 

### What I did well today

- 

### What I've learned today

- 

## Things I'm grateful for

-

---
